CHI 2016 Papers and Notes

Reviews of submission #1650: "Heartefacts: Augmenting Mobile Video
Sharing Using Wrist-Worn Heart Rate Sensors"

------------------------ Submission 1650, Review 4 ------------------------

Reviewer:           primary

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   This paper presents the results of a study which aims to collect data on
   heart-rate as a way of extracting subjective time-based meta-data about
   video consumption. The proposed mechanism for sharing this data is novel,
   based around video summaries.

Overall Rating

   3.0 - Neutral: Overall I would not argue for accepting or rejecting this paper. 

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review


The Meta-Review

   All three reviewers appreciated the timely and relevant topic that the
   authors have approached. Exploring possible use cases for consumer worn
   sensors, particularly in the media space is both an interesting and
   trending area in the community.

   All the reviewers however feel that the work does not go far enough in
   delivering a novel contribution, R3 in particular argues that the work
   delivers minimal novel contribution over existing work (that is cited in
   the paper), and reads like the beginnings of an interesting project which
   has not been finished. Although R1 scores the paper at 3, they also raise
   observations that the work is not ready for publication in its current
   form, and so it is key that the authors respond to the raised points in
   their rebuttal.

   R2 is particularly positive about the value of the data-set as a
   stand-alone contribution, but both R3 and myself (and R1 to some extent)
   have concerns that this data does not advance knowledge past the existing
   cited work, and the paper does not go far enough to explore the elements
   of personalized media sharing that could be the unique contribution of
   this work.  

   Whilst not concerning R1 and R3, R2 raises the issue of ethics, so it is
   important that the authors respond to this comment directly in their
   rebuttal, and assure the PC that appropriate ethical approval was
   obtained for the personal data collection.

   In summary, the authors should respond to the following in their rebuttal
   for PC consideration:
   - How this work stands alone as complete, rather than being a
   presentation of half-completed work.
   - How the paper delivers more than a data-set which confirms existing
   studies.
   - Clarifying the primary research questions, and the context of use in
   which these findings can be contextualized (i.e. personal media sharing
   vs. commercial).

Publicity Headline



------------------------ Submission 1650, Review 5 ------------------------

Reviewer:           secondary

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   This paper concerns the analysis of heart rates to assess emotional
   content of videos. This is embedded in a wider question on the extent to
   which people are willing to share their physiological data to control
   social media. As such it covers a timely and innovative area of human
   computer interaction

Overall Rating

   2.5 . . . Between possibly reject and neutral 

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review

   The study is embedded in a compelling subject area and the main
   contribution (the heart rate vs emotional content in videos study) seems
   well set up and carried out. 

   There are some elements that would improve the paper such as fixing
   unclarities about the division between two datasets and more depth of the
   discussion of the originality of this work as well as how and why sharing
   of physiological data can assist social media activities such as video
   sharing.

   However, the publication of this work as a full paper seems too early.
   While the overall aim of the study is extremely compelling, the current
   report only offers a first installment toward that more balanced view on
   physiological data to control social media content delivery and design
   consequences. The work may have been better presented in a note, however,
   I am unsure if rewriting to a note is acceptable in the timespan of the
   CHI publication process.  I feel that the current work offers an
   interesting lab study with limited validity which unfortunately, is not
   sufficient to merit publication.


The Meta-Review


Publicity Headline



------------------------ Submission 1650, Review 1 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   This paper explores heart rate as a measure of emotional engagement in
   video viewers, suggesting that it might be used as a way of extracting
   significant moments to share between viewers. The paper's principal
   contribution is a study tentatively that heart rate and emotional
   intensity of video content might be correlated with some accuracy using 
   readily-available wearables.

Overall Rating

   3.0 - Neutral: Overall I would not argue for accepting or rejecting this paper. 

Expertise

   2  (Passing Knowledge)

The Review

   This paper describes a project exploring how physiological data might be
   used as a control for media sharing via social media, through the use of
   wearables such as smart watches. Although the project is described
   briefly in its entirety, the paper focuses mainly on a study in which
   participants’ heart rates were recorded and a correlation with the
   emotional content of a set of videos was explored. 
   The paper is engagingly written and clearly situates itself within a
   domain. The literature review reinforces this position and covers both
   the physiological basis for the work and related projects within HCI. The
   envisaged outcome of the research is summarised succinctly in figure 6:
   it might be useful to bring this figure forward to the introduction and
   refer to it directly. 
   The study is documented in reasonable depth and a statistical analysis of
   the results has been performed. The discussion of the results is also
   carried out with some clarity. As a minor point: it is not clear from the
   text the precise effect of averaging between participant datasets: it
   would be useful to include at least one graph where individual
   participants’ data are compared with each other. 
   The main limitation in the paper currently is in the unfinished state of
   the project: the authors have conducted a study which has generated some
   interesting insights that shed light on the first part of their design
   problem (heart rates might be used to identify emotionally significant
   highlights) but the project currently seems to end there. The authors
   themselves acknowledge that more discussion is needed around video
   editing and sharing. The document as it stands represents a fairly useful
   first step in a project which might yield interesting designs, however
   the size of the participant group makes me hesitant to describe this as a
   significant contribution. I feel that this is a project well worth
   pursuing but possibly not yet ready for publication in this context. 


------------------------ Submission 1650, Review 2 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   The contribution of this work is that it suggests and designs a novel way
   in which people can share their physiological data and how it couples to
   outside events or behaviors in an accessible and acceptable way. The
   study also does some exploratory testing in a controlled environment.

Overall Rating

   4.0 - Possibly Accept: I would argue for accepting this paper 

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review

   •	Significance of the paper's contribution to HCI and the benefit that
   others can gain from the contribution: why do the contribution and
   benefit matter?

   This work addresses a timely issue, and provides some answers to
   important question such as whether and to what extent would people be
   willing to share their. This matters because many people are considering
   implementing this type of functionality in health or security domains.

   •	Originality of the work: what new ideas or approaches are introduced?
   We want to emphasize that an acceptable paper must make a clear
   contribution to Human-Computer Interaction;

   Given the enormity of the HCI field I do not claim to know how original
   this work is precisely. It is clear however the authors could do a better
   job in the discussion making this point themselves. I’m inclined to
   give this work the benefit of the doubt if the authors themselves add
   more precise statements about the replication, extension and novel
   aspects of their work in the discussion.

   •	Validity of the work presented: how confidently can researchers and
   practitioners use the results?

   At present this is still mainly a lab study with limited ecological
   validity. However, the data from the survey could be used immediately by
   other researchers or practitioner. The authors could think about how
   their work might be interesting to certain user groups with for example
   emotion regulation disorders (e.g. borderline personality disorders), and
   how sharing with caretakers with their application might be a valid
   extension?

   •	Presentation clarity;

   The text was easy to follow. I would have appreciated a clear statement
   of the research question(s). At present this is missing and the
   introduction flows into the methods quite abruptly. I wasn’t in the
   dark about the research at that point, but I think clarity could improve
   further by a more explicit statement of the RQs at the end of the
   introduction. 

   At present the section on Mobile Applications Using Physiological Data is
   also a bit of a summing up, which could be tied better to the author’s
   own study. 

   The discussion is too limited at present and the authors should strive to
   get a balance between the content in the discussion and the introduction.
   Far more could be done on placing the current work with respect to the
   current state of art in the field.

   •	Relevant previous work: is prior work adequately reviewed?

   The (theoretical) treatment of the relation between fluctuations in
   self-reported experience and physiological fluctuations should benefit
   more from insights from current literature. I suggest including work on
   the typical lack of correlation between these measures for individuals
   (e.g. Evers, C., Hopp, H., Gross, J. J., Fischer, A. H., Manstead, A. S.
   R., & Mauss, I. B. (2014). Emotion response coherence: A dual-process
   perspective. Biological Psychology, 98(1), 43–49.
   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2013.11.003). 

   The authors could reflect in the discussion on how insights from this
   dual-process perspective (evers et al. 2014) and the typical lack of
   coherence within individuals between physiological (automatic) and
   self-reported (reflective) measures might inform their next design
   iteration. 

   In the discussion more could be said about the difficulty in associating
   HR and physiological fluctuations with unique internal or external events
   (standard handbooks on physiology (e.g. the one by Cacioppo). It would be
   sad and a waste of time if this field in HCI would start making mistakes
   that have been made for decades in other applied physiological fields
   (e.g. lie detection) where people expected changes in physiology to be
   tied uniquely to a certain act (e.g. telling a lie).

   FURTHER SUGGESTIONS:

   - Given the sensitive nature of the topic (sharing your physiological
   data with others) and the inclusion of human participants I expected, but
   didn’t find an explicit statement on ethical assessment and approval of
   the research protocol by an independent committee. It would be very good
   if this could be added (only informed consent is not really sufficient I
   think).
   - Table 1 seems to contain a mistake. If I understand the author’s
   correctly all videos should have [5] or [4] [4]? Yet row two only has
   [4]? That for example should be a [5] I guess?
   -The sentence before discussion and conclusion contains a superfluous
   “these”.


------------------------ Submission 1650, Review 3 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   This paper proposes a novel mechanism for sharing physiological (heart
   rate) data with others: video summaries of the highlights of the video
   based on the heart rate readings 

Overall Rating

   2.0 - Possibly Reject: The submission is weak and probably shouldn't be accepted, but there is some chance it should get in. 

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review

   We are living in the wearable technology era, in which we are actively
   looking for a killer application (apart from wellbeing and fitness) that
   can utilize all that amount of relevant data that we think we will be
   gathering. Certainly, interpersonal communication and connectedness is an
   area where human responses and emotions play a crucial role. This paper
   follows the trend, investigating novel scenarios and applications based
   on physiological data gathered by intelligent accessories like watches.
   The authors aim at the creation of a video sharing service that allows
   users to automatically edit and annotate videos based on his/her heart
   rate data. The idea is interesting, but a bit unclear. Such uncertainty
   about the final objective makes it complicated to evaluate the actual
   benefits and drawbacks. Is it about media annotation and editing? Is it
   about personalized media sharing? It would help as well to understand
   which types of videos (personal or commercial) are intended for and who
   (friends, family members, the world) are the recipients, since the type
   of required evaluations might be different for each of the alternatives.

   The authors provide a good survey of previous systems and solutions,
   concluding that directly sharing raw physiological data is not a good
   idea (privacy, exposure…) Instead they propose a service by which video
   shared can be edited (cut highlights) based on hear rate data. I assume
   that the goal is that the response is an annotated version of the video,
   which includes the physiological response of the receiver. 
    
   For the design and development of the system, the authors follow a number
   of steps: online survey and exploratory study. While each of the
   methodologies is valid in its own accord, it remains unclear why this
   process was followed and how each stage influenced the other one. In
   principle, the survey does not provide any further insights than previous
   reports on media usage and sharing (e.g., Nielsen). I cannot understand
   why the authors spend over 2 pages out of 9 reporting the whole survey
   results, when they should have simply highlight the most relevant and
   striking ones. Apart from the results on sharing physiological signals,
   the rest of the results should have taken a maximum of two paragraphs.
   The next step was a study in which the heart rate data of users watching
   videos was recorded, and time-aligned with the video timeline. In this
   case, the objective was to better understand the relationship between the
   physiological signals and some emotions. Given the extensive number of
   studies in this area (referred by the authors), the findings are not that
   novel or interesting. Finally, the authors conclude the paper with a
   short analysis of how the highlights identified by the physiological
   signals will compare to those identified by one expert. While an
   interesting idea, the evaluation is rather incidental in order to take
   the results into account.

   Overall, I find the topic of the paper relevant and current.
   Unfortunately, the contribution is minimal, and the validation is not
   that strong. I believe that the paper would have made a good note by
   condensing it and only highlighting the novel findings. I am particularly
   concerned about how the physiological data is analyzed. It is unclear how
   acceleration and deceleration trends are quantified, and how such
   quantification is identified as significant and relevant (or not).
   Moreover, I am unsure about how the signals have been normalized (for
   example Fluerau at CHI2013 shows some robust algorithms to treat
   time-variant signals like these). Such light treatment of the data in my
   opinion result in rather incidental conclusions and in a weak
   contribution.

   In my view this is an interesting application that I would probably want
   to try. The paper is an example of exploratory research trying to better
   understand how new devices can be used for different scenarios.
   Unfortunately, the paper is not ready for publication and the authors
   would need to further explore the problem space, to more formally analyze
   the data, and to perform a number of extra experiments.



