CHI 2016 Papers and Notes

Reviews of submission #2699: "My Phone and Me: Understanding People's
Receptivity to Mobile Notifications"

------------------------ Submission 2699, Review 4 ------------------------

Reviewer:           primary

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI


Overall Rating

   3.5 . . . Between neutral and possibly accept 

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review


The Meta-Review

   The paper aims to provide a deeper understanding of users' interaction
   with mobile notification. The reviewers provided mixed scores. Reviewers
   consider the topic to be interesting (R2) as well as relevant and timely
   (R1). R1 argues that the work is an interesting advancement of recent
   research.

   R1, who provided the most positive review, states that the paper is
   packed with interesting results. It can make a valid contribution to CHI
   (R1, R3). It is well written (R2) and provides sufficient details for the
   reader.

   Reviewers all state that a major limitation is the accessibility of the
   paper's contribution. This, at least in parts, results from the density
   of the paper. A large number of interesting results are provided (R1).
   This makes it necessary to provide a clear summary of the main
   contributions and take away.

   Reviewers focus on the paper's current issues. The authors should provide
   a rebuttal to clarify the reviewers’ questions and concerns. In
   particular, the authors might want to address the following aspects and
   how they would incorporate according changes in the paper:
   * Provide information about how decision time is defined. In particular,
   how deletions of notifications are addressed and what is the starting
   point of measuring DT. (R1)
   * Explain how the "click rate" was determined. (R1)
   * State if the data was normal distributed. (R1)
   * Provide details about the use of the collected context data (R3)
   * State how reliable the speech input was (R3)

   Most importantly, the authors might want to provide a short description
   of the main implications/most important results of the study that could
   be included in a revised version of the paper

Publicity Headline



------------------------ Submission 2699, Review 1 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   The paper reveals how different factors, such as the ringer mode, the
   sender, or whether the user is busy, affect how fast people attend to
   notifications.

Overall Rating

   3.5 . . . Between neutral and possibly accept 

Expertise

   4  (Expert )

The Review

   The paper explores factors that affect mobile phone users' receptivity of
   mobile phone notifications. It analyzes that data of 20 volunteers, who
   installed an application that logged notifications & reactions to them (n
   = 10372), and collected subjective feedback for a subset (n = 474) of
   them through experience sampling.


   The paper is relevant and timely. It represents an interesting
   advancement of recent research about how people handle mobile phone
   notifications. The paper is packed with interesting results. While
   different factors that affect receptivity have been explored before, this
   paper covers a large set of them: including previously understudied
   sender-receiver relationship and personality. Conclusions are drawn
   carefully, limitations are disclosed properly.
   Study-wise, it is great to see how the authors took measures to make the
   ESM questionnaire more successful: the limitation to 4 per day to avoid,
   presenting a screenshot of the notification to improve recall, and
   allowing participants to dictate responses to increase compliance.

   All in all, the paper can make a good contribution to CHI and I support
   its acceptance. It would be easier to make a strong case for the paper,
   if the presentation of the results are improved (see 1), and that some
   open questions are clarified to my satisfaction in the rebuttal (see 2).

   There are two main aspects to improve:

   (1) ---------
   The most important aspect to improve is the result presentation. The
   paper is very dense, i.e. it reports a lot of very interesting results.
   Thus, is it even more important than usual to give the reader a good
   means to quickly find the results.

   For example, for the results on response time (pages 5 to 7), I would
   suggest to summarize findings in a list, such as

   * Notifications are seen
   	- fastest when the phone is in vibration mode
   	- fastest when the user is commuting and slowest when idle
   	- faster when ongoing tasks are more complex

   Decision times are
   	- fastest when they are from partners and immediate family members
   	- slowest when they are from extended family members and service
   providers

   Notifications are
   	- least disruptive when
   		+ performing simple tasks
   		+ the user is idle or has just started a task
   		+ the sender is extended family member
   	- most disruptive when
   		+ sender is not a person, or a work-related contact (subordinate,
   colleague)
   		+ when working

   ... and provide similar summaries for the other two result sections. In
   addition, some of these findings have been shown before, sometimes in the
   same, sometimes in different contexts. However, some of the findings have
   never been shown before. It would be great to have some emphasis on the
   truly novel findings.



   (2) ---------
   Some aspects of the paper require clarifications. I strongly suggest to
   clarify the following points in the rebuttal:

   * Regarding the decision time (DT), how is "react" defined? I found the
   definition for "seen" but not for "react". I assume that it includes
   launching the corresponding app. What about deleting the notification?

   * Further, regarding DT, the mean DTs are quite short: from 3.3 to 11.9
   seconds. What is considered as starting point for this interval? Is it
   the time that the notification arrives? Is it the time that the
   notification is seen?

   * What exactly does "click rate" mean? On page 5, it is defined as the
   "percentage of notifications that are clicked out of total
   notifications." Does this include or exclude events where, let's say, a
   WhatsApp notification was pending, and the user opened WhatsApp directly,
   without opening the notification center and tapping onto the WhatsApp
   notification?

   * Person Correlation was used to compute the "relationship between the
   complexity of an ongoing task and the seen time of a notification." Where
   the variables normally distributed? My experiences is that time-related
   variables in log data usually follow a power-law distribution. I suspect
   that a non-parametric alternative, such as Spearman Rank Correlation
   should have been used.

   * On page 6, what is the meaning of "response" in "high-priority
   notifications getting quicker response than low-priority notifications"?
   Is it the seen time (ST), the decision time (DT), or something else?


   Minor ------
   * The conclusions would benefit from stating findings explicitly. At the
   moment, the section mainly discloses that results regarding a factor were
   found, e.g. "we observe a substantial role of the individual
   psychological traits on how a person reacts to a mobile notification".
   However, it does not disclose what those findings are, e.g. which
   psychological traits affect people, and in what way people are affected.


------------------------ Submission 2699, Review 2 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   This submission presents results of an in-situ study on users’
   receptivity of mobile notifications.  Using a mobile application and
   experience sampling approach, a dataset was collected through an
   in-the-wild study. Based on the quantitative and qualitative data
   collected, different aspects were investigated including, response time,
   disruptiveness, and acceptance.

Overall Rating

   2.5 . . . Between possibly reject and neutral 

Expertise

   4  (Expert )

The Review

   The submission presents and interesting topic. Given the large number of
   notifications users receive daily, it is important to understand
   different aspects of the notification mechanism. 
   In general the paper is written in good details. The apparatus and the
   conducted user study are described in enough details.  
   However the result section is rather too long with too many sub-sections.
   It makes hard to follow the analysis. It would be better if  the authors
   add a paragraph right at the beginning of the result section and give an
   overview on the structure of the analysis.

   My main concern with this submission is its implications. While this
   submission has a very long result section, the implications are not
   discussed. Hence it is hard to understand what are the implications and
   findings of the study. It is essential to elaborate clearly the
   contributions of this research and lessons learned. The lengthy result
   discussion does not illustrate the contributions of this submission.

   Few other points:

   -what was the incentive of fitting a logistic regression model? And why
   only applied to the notification acceptance and not the other factors
   assessed (disruptiveness and response time)?
   -The submission has several grammatical issues and need to be proofread.
   E.g. page 8, “However, we our study…” → “However, our study
   …” 

   In conclusion, I believe that this submission is not mature enough to get
   accepted for CHI 16. Hence, I argue to reject it.

    


------------------------ Submission 2699, Review 3 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   The authors present a study of smartphone notifications and the impact of
   cognitive and physical factors on response time and perceived disruption.
   Data is collected with their novel approach to automated smartphone
   logging and experience sampling. 

Overall Rating

   4.0 - Possibly Accept: I would argue for accepting this paper 

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review

   The paper presents an in-the-wild study of smartphone notifications, and
   a novel logging and experience sampling method is used to capture both
   cognitive and physical factors and how they impact the response time and
   perceived disruption of a notification. This paper provides the reader
   with sufficient background to the topic, and the paper is very
   interesting and easy to read. 

   The main issue with the paper is that the findings are not currently
   accessible to the reader. The results section is very long, and reports
   many interesting insights. It is difficult to grasp the major outcomes of
   this study. A summary of results would make the contribution of this work
   stand out. Furthermore, the main results could be better highlighted in
   the conclusions. As it stands, there is little for the reader to learn
   from. A summary of how cognitive and physical factors impact response
   time and perceived disruption is required, along with the practical
   implications of these results for users, designers and researchers.

   The remaining points are focused on smaller issues with the reporting of
   this work and should be addressed in the rebuttal. With a small amount of
   work, this paper could make a valuable contribution to CHI, and I would
   possibly argue for its acceptance.

   The paper describes the collection of context data (Table 1), but it is
   not clear what this is used for. The physical activity that the user is
   involved in is gathered both via the Google Activity Recognition API and
   through the ESM questionnaire. Some clarification on this is needed. 

   Additionally, the application uses voice input to allow the user to
   dictate responses to the questionnaire. Some feedback on how reliable
   this was, and how many participants used this feature, would be useful to
   researchers who might follow this approach.

   In some places, the questionnaire is called a ESM questionnaire. In
   others, it is called the My Phone and Me questionnaire. Some consistency
   would be helpful here. 

   Similarly, there is inconsistency in the number of notifications that
   were collected in the abstract and introduction (10372 vs 19494). As the
   introduction does not explain this difference, I would suggest reporting
   the final number of notifications instead.

   A minor issue is that long sentences can be difficult to read,
   e.g., ‘We found that the <long list of items> influence the response
   time and the disruption perceived from a notification’.
   It would be easier to read if these long sentences were flipped, 
   e.g., ‘We found that the response time and the disruption perceived
   from a notification can be influenced by the <long list of items>’.



