CHI 2016 Papers and Notes

Reviews of submission #2316: "Under the Radar: Exploring the Feasibility
of Subliminal Goal Priming on Smartphones"

------------------------ Submission 2316, Review 4 ------------------------

Reviewer:           primary

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI


Overall Rating

   2.0 - Possibly Reject: The submission is weak and probably shouldn't be accepted, but there is some chance it should get in. 

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review


The Meta-Review

   The paper proposes subliminal goal priming on smartphones. Overall the
   paper is nicely written (R1, R2) and previous work is well covered and
   introduced (R2, R3). Reviewers consider the topic interesting (R1, R2)
   and research in this domain to be worthwhile. I would add that this work
   goes into an exciting direction and could lead to a very valuable
   contribution.

   Reviewers identified a number of limitations. The measures are not
   analysed using inferential statistics (R1). Thus, no hard evidence (R2)
   for differences between the two conditions can be provided.

   The most important issue is raised by R3. The authors compare two
   conditions that both have the potential to present the words in a
   subliminal way. Before comparing different subliminal approaches it
   would, however, be necessary to show that subliminal goal priming works
   in everyday life and high-level tasks. Therefore, it would be necessary
   to add an additional condition without goal priming (mask only, no prime
   - R3) to determine if subliminal goal priming actually works. The
   presented study cannot show if one or both conditions are perceived in a
   subliminal way and it also cannot show if the presentation has an effect.
   Thus, I agree with R3 who states that it is not possible to draw
   conclusions from the study.

   Reviewers provide very valuable further comments for improving the paper.
   While the work is not ready for publication yet I would be eager to see a
   continuation of the work. The direction is certainly worth exploring.

   Demonstrating that subliminal goal priming works in everyday life and for
   real life tasks could be a major contribution. This would, however,
   require a study that tests the effect by comparing participants’
   behaviour against a baseline. This would certainly require a larger
   sample. In addition, it would certainly help to determine objective
   measures (e.g. as simple as logging the participants' activities using
   activity recognition APIs provided on current smartphones). Furthermore,
   inferential statistics is required to show effects.

Publicity Headline



------------------------ Submission 2316, Review 1 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   The authors presented an interesting pilot study conducted to explore the
   possibility of applying subliminal goal priming on behaviour change,
   using smartphones as the platform. The data showed the subliminal goal
   priming brought no positive impact on users' goal commitment. At the same
   time, it didn't make the users react adversely either. 

Overall Rating

   2.5 . . . Between possibly reject and neutral 

Expertise

   2  (Passing Knowledge)

The Review

   The paper is nicely written and well structured. The concept behind this
   pilot study is very interesting, and the authors have carefully scoped
   the study. However, the paper can be further improved if the authors can
   address the following issues:

   1. Some researchers have indeed visited the idea of understanding how
   users perceive technology based health interventions. Bonnie Spring and
   colleagues' work on health apps talked about that. Would be nice to see
   them in related works.

   Spring, Bonnie, et al. "Healthy apps: mobile devices for continuous
   monitoring and intervention." Pulse, IEEE 4.6 (2013): 34-40.

   2. I hope the authors have considered language barriers, and their effect
   on priming. If so, please provide more information about the study
   participants on this aspect.

   3. Hintze's work on average mobile uses per day also stated that users
   unlock their devices for about 43% of all interactions, and the
   performance of individuals are quite diverse. It would be very useful to
   know the total number of interactions (when they unlock the screen)
   happened during the study per participants / group, considering the
   sample size is quite small.

   4. Page 3 Paragraph "All participants were asked to ...", line 6, did the
   authors mean "NO mask condition participants (n=5) ..."?

   5. If there is a reason that the significant level was not calculated and
   reported in the Results section, please state so.

   6. The authors may consider change how they report results from tables to
   text, so to make more room to list items in the pre and post
   questionnaires. 


------------------------ Submission 2316, Review 2 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   This manuscript presents a theoretical and qualitative evaluation of
   technology that is able to subliminally prime goals on smart phones. The
   manuscript is readable, and describes the relevant literature quite well.
   So, although not providing evidence for the actual effectiveness of this
   kind of subliminal priming technology, it can be considered an
   interesting contribution to scientific literature. 

Overall Rating

   3.5 . . . Between neutral and possibly accept 

Expertise

   2  (Passing Knowledge)

The Review

   The manuscript is readable, and describes the relevant literature quite
   well. So, although not providing evidence for the actual effectiveness of
   this kind of subliminal priming technology, it can be considered an
   interesting contribution to scientific literature.

   As the authors state in their Abstract, they present a qualitative study.
   Because of several reasons (e.g., low number of participants) statistical
   analyses indeed not seem to be possible. So, hard evidence for the
   effectiveness of the 'BCIT's is not there. Still, I agree with the
   authors that it seems an interesting and worthwhile approach. However, I
   do not quite know whether CHI papers need to present hard evidence, or
   rather, can also do more theoritical work.

   In the Abstract, I do not understand what ‘We outline surveyed user
   attitudes … ‘  means specifically. 

   Also, the next sentence (‘We report on a user study of an
   implementation of our approach…’ is unclear: were people asked for
   what they think about such technology?  Whether they think it might work?
   But, importantly, I do not understand the relevance of people’s
   conscious responses to questions about unconscious influencing…  
   Reading the manuscript, I understand that the study assessed acceptance
   by users. This focus should be made clear in the title and abstract.

   the abbrehiviation BCIT is a new one, and I would propose to stick to
   existing ones, and to earlierly proposed definitions of persuasive
   technology. Eg to the work by Harri Oinas-Kukkonen.








------------------------ Submission 2316, Review 3 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Your Assessment of this Paper's Contribution to HCI

   This paper presents a concept of using subliminal goal priming on mobile
   phones for behavior change interventions. The idea is to prime a
   motivational phrase (and smiley) while unlocking the screen in order to
   support behavior change. Besides the idea itself, the paper provides some
   helpful details for people that might want to start with similar
   research.

Overall Rating

   1.5 . . . Between reject and possibly reject 

Expertise

   2  (Passing Knowledge)

The Review

   As already outlined in the authors’ preceeding publication [1], there
   is a clear need for BCITs, e.g., to get rid of behavior that is known to
   be harmful. In combination with the interesting approach of testing
   subliminal priming on the mobile phone, it is worth doing research in
   this domain and I appreciate submitting such contributions to CHI. 
   Looking at the introduction and related work section, the authors
   introduce the topic appropriately and might also allow people that are
   rather novel to this field to understand this domain.
   However, while reading the rest of the submission, I stumbled across
   various issue due to which I recommend to possibly reject this submission
   in its current state.
   The biggest issue is probably the presented study. Starting with a
   somehow shortened study description (see also comments for improvement
   below), it is somehow tricky to extract the exact purpose of the study,
   the method (between subject), and the procedure since many details are
   not expressed explicitly. With regard to the experiment design (between
   subject), the number of participants is extremely low, which probably
   also is the reason why the authors did not report and results of
   statistical tests.
   Even though the authors state that they did a pre-test to measure how
   long the prime is actually shown, I am not sure whether the same timings
   happened throughout the experiment since 2 participants in the non-mask
   group were able to see the prime. With this regard, I am also wondering
   what the authors mean with “while 2 participants (40%) in the mask
   condition reported that they could not recognize the goal word” –
   does this mean that 60% did see the word in this condition. If yes, we
   have to assume that the timings might have been wrong and that it was
   actually no subliminal priming. Speculating about potential reasons, I
   could imagine that the feasibility study was conducted on a “fresh”
   phone without many Apps, while the participants were using their own
   (different!) phones with a multitude of apps, of which many might run in
   the background and slow down certain processes. It is not explicitly
   stated that the participants used their own phones and the timing
   probably should have been tested on each phone in advance – or the
   participants should have used the same phones throughout the experiment.
   Also, it would have been interesting to see whether some kind of logging
   of the timing happened. This might have helped to trace down potential
   technical issues. With regard to the two conditions, I was wondering
   whether a third group (mask only, no prime) as a control group would be
   necessary as also mentioned in the authors previous publication [1].
   With regard to the outcome of the questionnaire, I am a bit confused. As
   the authors state in the discussion, it takes at least 18 days to form a
   habit. Is it then useful to conduct a study for a week only? 
   All in all, I am not able to draw some real conclusions or extract
   helpful findings from the conducted study. Thus, even though there is
   more content presented than in the authors’ previous publication [1], I
   do not see that this is sufficient to justify accepting the paper.
   However, the future work section provides some nice ideas, e.g., to
   extend the concept to other devices and see whether different display
   times might be needed. I would be careful with stating that subliminal
   goal priming is possible due to the potentially technical issues outlined
   earlier. 


   Improvement:
   - Study description: What were the participants told the study is about /
   how it works (might influence the outcome). It should be clearly
   mentioned in the beginning that a between-subject experiment has been
   conducted. Also, more details about the participants (e.g., age) should
   be provided, especially since age might have an influence on reaction and
   perception. Additionally, in the 2nd paragraph the authors probably want
   to talk about “non-mask condition participants”. Since not the HWK
   scale might not be known to many HCI researchers, it should be explained
   better. Also, the additional questions should not be attached as
   supplementary material but mentioned in the paper.
   - Results: Figures 3 and 4 may be improved, e.g., the dimensions of the
   axes are not mentioned
   - As the authors already mention, there seem to be Apps that deal with a
   similar topic (see also [2,3]. Thus, I do not feel comfortable stating
   that this use is novel (Abstract)
   - All sentences in the abstract start with “We”. That does not read
   very well.
   - For a next iteration, the motivation as well as concrete finding should
   be communicated better in abstract, introduction, and conclusion (missing
   completely!).
   - What does the “it” in the first sentence of the second paragraph in
   column 2 on page 1 refer to?

   [1] Charlie Pinder, Jo Vermeulen, Russell Beale, and Robert Hendley.
   2015. Subliminal Priming of Nonconscious Goals on Smartphones. In
   Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Human-Computer
   Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services Adjunct (MobileHCI '15).
   ACM, New York, NY, USA, 825-830.
   DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2786567.2793707 
   [2]
   https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.creadigol.subliminal 
   [3]
   https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.MegaBit.SubliminalLite 



